# SAOC LLDB D integration: 1st Weekly Update

Hi D community!

I'm here to describe what I've done during the first week on the Symmetry
Autumn of Code.

## `liblldbd`

During the discussion for the milestones plan with my mentor, I decided to
advance some work and wrote a simple C API around D runtime demangler to expose
the D demangler API into a C interface. This would allow in the future to
implement an LLDB language plugin into the LLVM. The source code is available
on Github,
[liblldbd](https://github.com/ljmf00/liblldbd).

### Alternatives to `liblldbd`

In the meanwhile, we decided to focus on porting libiberty demangler codebase
to the LLVM upstream repository since it would provide much more benefits and
acceptance to be upstreamed. So the `liblldbd` is a plan B if libiberty is not
accepted by the LLVM team.

## Port of `libiberty` demangler

Right after we finished the plan, in which you can follow up
[here](https://pad.riseup.net/p/r.05c919765a66f89368a3fc28c98432db), I started
porting `libiberty` and integrate the code into the LLVM core. Similarly to
Rust demangler, I tried to follow up some patches on the [LLVM review
platform](https://reviews.llvm.org/) and the awesome documentation that LLVM
provides.

This ended up being relatively easy to plug into the LLVM codebase, since most
of the demangler logic was isolated in one file, thanks to Iain (@ibuclaw) for
the excelent code. Because I didn't expect this to be so plug and play I
decided to extensively test the code using the robust test suite that LLVM
provides.

## Testing

First, I started to port the `libiberty` test suite for D demangling and right
after wrote some `libfuzzer` tests and ran it with an address sanitizer and UB
sanitizer.

### Security vulnerabilities

The `libfuzzer` results took some time to show up but I got some interesting
outputs from there. The most interesting one was a heap/stack buffer overflow.
I also managed to find a null dereferencing.  Both, with a crafted malicious
mangle name, can trigger a segmentation fault or undefined behaviour by
reading/writing to a protected memory space.

I wrote a patch to fix both issues and contacted MITRE for standard
vulnerabilities reporting procedure, since GCC is widely used and can
potentially cause some issues. I pushed those patches into the GCC mailing
list, and I'm currently waiting for appreciation. You can check those two
patches
[here](https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2021-September/579985.html)
and
[here](https://gcc.gnu.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2021-September/579987.html).

After patching the code I ran the fuzzer again and after some hours the fuzzer
reported a timeout with a huge number of recursive calls. I carefully analyzed
the generated output mangle that the fuzzer created and found out that it is a
very repetitive name. Doing some superficial analysis I found out that those
recursive calls are creating exponential time complexity and can cause the
demangler to wait for hours or even days to complete. I believe that this can
also be used to maliciously cause a denial of service, although I didn't have
much time to profile it yet.

To have some discussion about this I'm going to create a thread on the GCC
security mailing list and express some solutions to mitigate those problems,
such as integrating part of the codebase into the OSS fuzzer.

Before that, I'm waiting for a reply to the message I sent to MITRE, which was
forwarded to Red Hat security team for further appreciation.

I don't really know if this is crucial to share now, but I saved the fuzzer
result, if anyone is interested in researching more ideas of crafted mangles to
feed the address/UB sanitizer.

## LLDB integration

The last task I was working on (today) was on finalizing the LLDB integration.
I still need to write some tests but the most important fact is that it is
already working! My LLDB tree can successfully pretty print the mangled names.
My fork is available on my Github,
[here](https://github.com/ljmf00/llvm-project/tree/add-d-demangler).

### Some considerations

From the first time I built LLVM I found out that compiling it with debug
information is extremely costly in terms of memory usage, since linking all
those symbols at once can consume a lot of RAM. I recommend you build it with
`Release` flags.

Here is my `cmake` config so far, if someone wants to test my work at any
point.
```
cmake -S llvm -B build -G Ninja \
       -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="clang;libcxx;libcxxabi;lldb" \
       -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
       -DLLDB_EXPORT_ALL_SYMBOLS=0 \
       -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON \
       -DLLVM_CCACHE_BUILD=ON \
       -DLLVM_LINK_LLVM_DYLIB=ON \
       -DCLANG_LINK_CLANG_DYLIB=ON
```

To build LLDB, you can do something like:

```
cmake --build build -- lldb -j$(nproc --all)
```

## What's next?

Next week, I'm going to have an eye on the time complexity problem, try to
solve it, restructure the code to look a bit more C++ish and finishing the LLDB
test suite to finally start upstreaming my changes.  Although, this can take a
while, since there is a challenge, described in the plan, which is
dual-licensing the GCC codebase with LLVM codebase. This is cooperatively being
handled by Mathias (my mentor), Iain and GCC team.
