---
title: 'SAOC LLDB D integration: 13th Weekly Update'
date: '2021-12-16T23:34:00+01:00'
tags: ['saoc', 'saoc2021', 'dlang', 'llvm', 'lldb', 'debug', 'debugging', 'dwarf']
description: "This post describes what I've done on the 13th week of the
Symmetry Autumn of Code 2021, including some bug fixes and trivial patches."
---

Hi D community!

I'm here again, to describe what I've done during the thirteenth week of
Symmetry Autumn of Code. This week as a bit atypical as I got infected with
COVID-19 and this made me feel exhausted both physically and mentally.

## Working approach to fetch basic types

After digging a bit about the problem I found out there is no problem
specifically in Release builds, and a simple function called `Verify` is there
to double check if the type is correct for Debug builds. After fixing that
function, the LLDB can now dump some simple output about global TLS and non-TLS
variables:

```
(lldb) ta v
Global variables for app.d in app:
app.bar = <No TLS data currently exists for this thread.>

app.ptr = <could not resolve type>
app.foobar =
```

For now it only recognizes boolean types, but it can't show up the value since
LLDB doesn't know a way to dump it correctly.

You can try this version yourself using
[this](https://github.com/devtty63/llvm-project/tree/lldb-d/implement-typesystem-d)
branch.

## Decoupling and trivial patches

I pushed a patch to decouple DWARF to LLDB encoding logic from Clang DWARF AST
Parser, along with a trivial fix about duplicate map assignment:

- https://reviews.llvm.org/D115662
- https://reviews.llvm.org/D115663

## What is next?

I already started working on some helpers to fetch the LLDB Format, Encoding
and BasicType, along with other information about a type to properly display
them. I'm not sure how Milestone 4 is going to work, as I underestimated
the support for custom expessions.

You can also read this on the D programming language forum,
[here](https://forum.dlang.org/thread/avdjlcpavgteneazaebd@forum.dlang.org),
and discuss there!

Read about the [previous week](../d-saoc-2021-12/).
