---
title: 'Zettelkasten #7: Solution in D for Advent of Code 2021, Day 6'
date: '2021-12-17T22:19:00+01:00'
tags: ['zettelkasten', 'zet', 'dlang', 'aoc', 'aoc2021', 'adventofcode']
description: "This post describes my solution in the D programming language for
the 6th puzzle of the Advent of Code 2021."
---

## The challenge

### Part 1

> The sea floor is getting steeper. Maybe the sleigh keys got carried this way?
>
> A massive school of glowing lanternfish swims past. They must spawn quickly
> to reach such large numbers - maybe exponentially quickly? You should model
> their growth rate to be sure.
>
> Although you know nothing about this specific species of lanternfish, you
> make some guesses about their attributes. Surely, each lanternfish creates a
> new lanternfish once every 7 days.
>
> However, this process isn't necessarily synchronized between every
> lanternfish - one lanternfish might have 2 days left until it creates another
> lanternfish, while another might have 4. So, you can model each fish as a
> single number that represents the number of days until it creates a new
> lanternfish.
>
> Furthermore, you reason, a new lanternfish would surely need slightly longer
> before it's capable of producing more lanternfish: two more days for its
> first cycle.
>
> So, suppose you have a lanternfish with an internal timer value of 3:
>
> - After one day, its internal timer would become 2.
> - After another day, its internal timer would become 1.
> - After another day, its internal timer would become 0.
> - After another day, its internal timer would reset to 6, and it would create
>   a new lanternfish with an internal timer of 8.
> - After another day, the first lanternfish would have an internal timer of 5,
>   and the second lanternfish would have an internal timer of 7.
>
> A lanternfish that creates a new fish resets its timer to 6, not 7 (because 0
> is included as a valid timer value). The new lanternfish starts with an
> internal timer of 8 and does not start counting down until the next day.
>
> Realizing what you're trying to do, the submarine automatically produces a
> list of the ages of several hundred nearby lanternfish (your puzzle input).
>
> [...]
>
> Find a way to simulate lanternfish. How many lanternfish would there be after
> 80 days?

You can read the challenge more in depth,
[here](https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/6).

### Part 2

> Suppose the lanternfish live forever and have unlimited food and space. Would
> they take over the entire ocean?
>
> [...]
>
> How many lanternfish would there be after 256 days?

## Full solution

```d
auto input = stdin.byLineCopy().front.splitter(",").map!(to!ubyte).array; // input
auto count = iota(0,9).map!(s => input.count!(a => a == s)).array;        // count fish lifes
iota(0,256).each!((d){count[(d+7)%9]+=count[d%9];});                      // calculate number of fishes per day
count.sum.writeln;                                                        // sum all fishes
```
