---
title: 'Zettelkasten #8: Solution in D for Advent of Code 2021, Day 7'
date: '2021-12-17T22:25:00+01:00'
tags: ['zettelkasten', 'zet', 'dlang', 'aoc', 'aoc2021', 'adventofcode']
description: "This post describes my solution in the D programming language for
the 7th puzzle of the Advent of Code 2021."
---

## The challenge

> A giant whale has decided your submarine is its next meal, and it's much
> faster than you are. There's nowhere to run!
>
> Suddenly, a swarm of crabs (each in its own tiny submarine - it's too deep
> for them otherwise) zooms in to rescue you! They seem to be preparing to
> blast a hole in the ocean floor; sensors indicate a massive underground cave
> system just beyond where they're aiming!
>
> The crab submarines all need to be aligned before they'll have enough power
> to blast a large enough hole for your submarine to get through. However, it
> doesn't look like they'll be aligned before the whale catches you! Maybe you
> can help?
>
> There's one major catch - crab submarines can only move horizontally.
>
> You quickly make a list of the horizontal position of each crab (your puzzle
> input). Crab submarines have limited fuel, so you need to find a way to make
> all of their horizontal positions match while requiring them to spend as
> little fuel as possible.
>
> [...]
>
> Determine the horizontal position that the crabs can align to using the least
> fuel possible. How much fuel must they spend to align to that position?

You can read the challenge more in depth,
[here](https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/7).

## Part 1

### Full solution

```d
auto input = stdin.byLineCopy().front.splitter(",").map!(to!long); // input
input.map!(a => input.map!(b => abs(a-b)).sum).minElement.writeln; // calculate costs
```

## Part 2

> The crabs don't seem interested in your proposed solution. Perhaps you
> misunderstand crab engineering?
>
> As it turns out, crab submarine engines don't burn fuel at a constant rate.
> Instead, each change of 1 step in horizontal position costs 1 more unit of
> fuel than the last: the first step costs 1, the second step costs 2, the
> third step costs 3, and so on.
>
> [...]
>
> Determine the horizontal position that the crabs can align to using the least
> fuel possible so they can make you an escape route! How much fuel must they
> spend to align to that position?

### Full solution

```d
auto input = stdin.byLineCopy().front.splitter(",").map!(to!long).array; // input
iota(input.maxElement).map!(a => input                                   // iter 0 to max element
    .map!(b => abs(a-b)*(abs(a-b)+1)/2).sum).minElement.writeln;         // calculate costs
```
